Hi everybody physics ninja here today.
We're going to do is we're going to apply GAUSS LAW this equation right over here which is the integral
of the electric field scalar product with the area is equal to cuing closed over Epsilon 0 we're going
to apply Gauss as law in order to find the electric field everywhere in space and the geometry I'm considering
here is the one shown in the figure.
So what we have here is a sphere at the center of a shell.
OK so the sphere the inner sphere has a radius a the outer shell has a thickness and the inner radius
is B and the outer radius is C So how would you solve for the electric field everywhere in space.
And what we're gonna do is we're going to consider two cases.
OK so case number one for this inner sphere I'm going to assume that it is a conductor.
OK.
And again that inner shell or saw that inner sphere rather has a total charge equal to three Q The outer
shell is has a total net charge of negative Q OK so how would you set up GAUSS LAW to solve for the
electric field everywhere and for the second case what I'm going to do is I'm going to assume that this
inner sphere is an insulator and the charge is uniformly distributed throughout the volume of that sphere.
OK.
So they've got two different cases.
If it's insulating vs. conducting what is the difference.
How do you set up Gauss is like what makes it different.
OK so Case 1 here is the case where we're going to assume that this inner sphere is conducting.
Okay.
And my goal is define the electric field in Region 1 so anywhere within this sphere.
So the first thing you do for Case 1 is if it's a conducting sphere.
OK.
This is a very very special word.
If you hear that word conducting sphere it means by definition OK that the electric field inside must
be equal to zero.
Well how is that possible.
OK.
The only way that it's possible from Gauss is law that you get zero.
The only way that's possible is if the enclosed charge of my Goshen surface also equals the zero.
So what that means here is that this three Q must be spread out evenly on this spherical surface.
OK so that's it.
This is what's going to happen for a conductor.
You can't have any charge anywhere inside because that would produce an electric field and then that
means that the charges would move because there'd be a force acting on them.
OK so Case 1 is kind of just the definition that the field inside a conductor must be zero.
So all of the charge is going to be on the outside.
OK now case 2 is a little bit more complicated so for Case 2 what we're going to assume here is that
the charge is going to be uniformly distributed throughout the entire volume here of all right.
We're gonna assume that it's uniformly distributed throughout the entire volume of the sphere.
Okay.
So what we have to do now is you.
Now you really have to apply GAUSS LAW FOR THIS.
SO THE FIRST THING WE'RE GONNA DO IS again draw our Gaussian surface.
And that's again it's going to look like a sphere.
Mine's a little bit rough looking that's OK and the sphere here has a certain radius.
Let's call it radius little are like this.
All right.
So the question is how do you apply GAUSS LAW FOR THIS.
SO SINCE THIS IS PHYSICALLY symmetric actually the left hand side of GAUSS LAW is always pretty straightforward.
OK so first of all to get rid of this integral the integral will simply simplify to something like this.
It's the electric field magnitude multiplied by the surface right.
And the reason that it simplifies is because again the electric field produced by any amount of charge
inside the sphere is going to be pointing straight out and the area is also all right.
If I look at the little bit of area of my sphere that's also a vector that points radiantly outward.
So what we need to do now is simply evaluate what is this total area of the sphere.
And in this case it's simply for pi r square this is the formula for the surface of a sphere that has
a radius are all right.
So now you write down the rest of Gauss as law it's the charging close then this green surface and divided
by epsilon 0.
All right pretty straightforward.
Now you have to use kind of your judgment here and try to evaluate how do we find how much charge is
inside.
Now it's not equal to three Q because three q is the total charge so it's going to be a fraction of
the total charge right.
If you think about how much charges and close let's go ahead and write it down give my marker.
All right.
So we have q enclosed is really going to be a fraction of the total charge.
Now what you could also do is you could define a charge density which equals to the total charge divided
by the total volume and then integrate over the volume.
You really don't have to do that.
You could just say it's going to be a volume fraction of the total charge.
So this is would be the total volume of this sphere which is for pi r cube.
And in this way it's a cube.
Right because the radius of the sphere is a.
And now how much volume is enclosed here in this green surface.
It would be again for thirds pi r cube.
All right well we can simplify this expression a little bit the four thirds cancel the PI cancel and
my total charge is really three Q So at the end this year simplifies to our cube multiplied by three
Q I'll put the three in the front and divided by a cube.
Okay so now I'm just gonna put everything together Let me give myself a little bit of extra space here
kind of shrink that down.
Okay so now we plug everything into Gauss law.
So again the left hand side was e multiplied by 4 pi r squared in the right hand side was Q in close
which is my expression here divided by epsilon 0.
So it's just 3 R cube big Q and divided by epsilon 0 a cube.
Okay we could simplify a few of the terms here.
First of all you notice you have r squared here and you have our cube here which means you could get
rid of two of them and get rid of the two appear you're still left with one.
And at the end you just want one final expression for my electric field magnitude.
So I bring the four pi down to the bottom so you get one over for Pi Epsilon zero.
You kind of always have that term right.
And then let's look at all the terms that are left.
3 q is the charge so that term is there and I still have divided by a cube.
That's just the constant term.
That's the radius of this sphere.
And then at the end I can't forget this.
R And this is really really important right.
So this is it depends linearly with the distance away from the center.
So to kind of really different results.
Right.
If it's insulating and the charge is uniformly distributed this is what you get.
And if it's a conducting sphere you would get zero.
OK.
All the way up until the surface.
All right.
So now let's consider the second region.
So for Region 2 now.
Region 2 is in this white area.
This white space between the sphere and that outer shell.
And again what you first do is you draw your Goshen surface somewhere within that white region.
And my goal now is to write down Gauss as law.
So again it's physically symmetric.
So the left hand side of Gauss is law basically always reduces to this for PI and the area of this sphere
is for Pi are squared.
OK.
That was the left hand side of Gauss his law equals the Q and closed divided by my constant Epsilon
0.
So now you ask yourself how much charge is enclosed by this shell or by this Gaussian surface rather.
And again if you have a look at the diagram how much charges is close will all of this charge that is
inside this inner sphere is enclosed right.
And whether it's conducting or whether it's insulating it really doesn't matter because that total charge
was 3 q all right.
The only difference if it's conducting or insulating it's the way that the charge is spread out.
But really this charging close is always 3 q so I can just go ahead and write it down that's the total
charge and closed divided by epsilon 0.
Again just rewrite the left hand side of Gauss as law here and again bring the 4 pi are squared at the
bottom and this is what we're left with.
Total charges 3 q divided by 4 pi Epsilon 0 multiplied or sorry divided by our squared like this.
All right so this looks like a familiar expression right.
This looks like exactly the field produced by a point charge that would have a charge equal to three
Q And that charge would all be concentrated at one point.
Right.
And if I'm a distance are away this would be the expression I would use to find the magnitude of the
field produced by that point charge.
OK.
Kind of a nice result from Gauss is law.
Let's consider the third region now.
So Region 3 now is anywhere inside this outer shell.
However in the statement of the problem I said something really really important.
Okay.
I said that this outer shell is a conductor.
And this is really really the key to this problem right here.
So if it's a conductor you should automatically know the field inside anywhere inside this the field
inside the outer shell which is right it is e subscript shell must be equal to zero it's a conductor.
Now if you think back of our Gauss is law we'll think about our Gauss is law.
How would we get to zero.
Right.
How would we get zero for the electric field in this region.
Well let's write down Gauss is law the left hand side of Gauss is law would be if he multiplied by four
pi are squared.
Again this is as physically symmetric object.
So this is how it would look like in the area of my Gaussian surface over here is for Pi our squared.
Now this has to be equal to q in close divided by epsilon 0.
But how do we get Q in closed for this problem.
Well let's think about how much charge is enclosed here.
So we have charging close we definitely having closed all of this right.
Because my ocean surface is out here and I have 3 Q Okay but I do require this statement right.
How do I get zero electric field the only way I can really have zero electric field is if my Q closed
must also be equal to zero.
If queueing close the zero then automatically the field is going to be zero.
So that means that there has to be some charge that has to go on this inner wall of the shell.
And now the question is how much charge goes on this inner wall.
Well let's.
We have to add it up because it's going to be enclosed by this Gaussian surface.
So it's gonna be plus Q What is right is inner wall.
OK.
So at the end of the day we do require that the Q enclosed over here is equal to zero.
And the only way you can have this because I do have the three each Q enclosed from this sphere.
That means that the inner wall Q inner wall must be opposite of whatever the total charges from this
sphere.
So at the end of the day I find that the only way I can have zero electric field inside this conductor
is if the charge on this inner wall is equal to negative three.
Q This is a requirement and this will ensure that the total charge enclosed is going to be zero.
And that is going to force that electric field to also be zero.
Okay so go ahead and write this so.
Q inner wall
must be equal to negative 3.
Q All right so this way you add negative 3 q to the plus three Q of the sphere and you're going to get
zero total charge in closed.
If I have zero total charge and closed I'm going to get zero electric field anywhere in this region
so the next question we have to ask ourselves is well if this inner wall has negative three Q like we
calculated here what about the outer wall.
Right how much charge is actually on this surface over here of that shell.
And in order to answer that you simply have to look at the total charge of that conductor in this problem
I said that the total charge of the conductor was negative.
Q All right.
So this is kind of oil it looks like.
Right.
So cue total for the shell has to be equal to whatever is on the inner wall inner.
I'll just write as Q inner plus whatever's on the outer wall.
OK.
And the total charge of the shell is given by this no negative Q This is what we had this was negative
Q we just solve for what was on this inner wall the inner wall we said was negative three Q So plus
q outer.
So at the end now we just bring the negative three Q On the other side you're left with that the charge
on the outer surface charge on the outer surface must be equal to to Q You have no choice you have to
have conservation of charge.
So if I put negative Q on here that means that on the inner wall I'm going to get negative three Q And
on the outer wall I have to have plus two.
Q That's the only way that both of those are going to sum up to equal to the total charge on the shell.
Okay because negative three plus two gives me negative 1 which is what I said in the problem statement
and you have this distribution of charge because we do require that the field is equal to zero everywhere
in this shell because it's a conductor.
All right let's go on to the final region.
OK so this is now region for what I've drawn is a ocean surface that is on the outside because this
is where I want to evaluate the field I want to evaluate it when the radius is bigger than C so I want
to be on the outside of that conducting shell right again we apply Gauss is a lot of this problem we
want to look at the field dotted with the area it's a spherical service so the area of that sphere is
for Pi our squared always the same thing for spherical symmetric objects.
All right.
This must be equal to again how much charge is enclosed by that surface divided by epsilon 0.
Well now let's look at what is Q and closed for this problem.
Well number one I am enclosing this entire sphere right.
I definitely have all of that charge.
So if you go ahead and write this you have to have definitely plus three Q is enclosed by this Gaussian
surface what else.
I am also enclosing all of the charge that is on the shell and all of the charge on the shell is well
it's negative.
Q So at the end what I have is to Q This has to be the total charge enclosed by my Gaussian surface
in this case.
So we go ahead we substitute that into Gauss as law so you get e for Pi are squared must be equal to
to Q divided by epsilon 0 to get the final expression you just bring all of this term in the bracket
here down in the denominator on the other side so you'll get to Q divided by 4 pi Epsilon 0 and over
our squared again if you look at this result this would be the result that you would get if you had
a point charge and if the point charge was equal to 2 Q and I was a certain distance R away from that
point charge right.
This is if I'm evaluating what is the field at this point I would get the exact same result.
Okay.
And that's kind of obtained from Gauss is low this way.
So here's a summary of the results that we obtain let's try to make a sketch now.
So for the region from what I'm plotting here is the magnitude of the electric field this just right
is E here on the y axis and I have the distance R on this x axis and let's draw the different cases.
So the first we're gonna do is well if it's a conducting sphere then you should have zero here.
Now this other one is if it's insulating let me put it in a different color over here it should be a
linear relationship and it should go all the way to the top over here.
OK.
So the field grows as I get away from the distance could I end up being closing more charge.
All right.
And let's do the second region the field is kind of the same it starts off in both cases appear and
it rolls off as one over R squared so it should look something like this over here.
Right.
Should roll off here and this is like a one over our squared dependence.
All right.
And what about the next part.
The region here in the shell between B and C.
So in that case that case is pretty easy to draw.
It should just be zero because it's a conductor.
And in the last region again it should probably start at some value over here.
It's going to be lower than this because I'm further out.
And again it's gonna roll off as one over R squared.
Again this is proportional to the distance squared.
All right this is kind of what it looks like again in these regions here you could have zero because
it's a conductor.
And again it depends on the case here that I looked at but this is what a sketch would look like for
this electric field.
All right.
Thanks for watching folks.
Hopefully you understood it and you become a better problem solver.